HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff are
in Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, preparing for
tomorrow night's
Democratic debate.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: Two
clear winners
emerge from New Hampshire, but
what does this
mean for the rest of the
presidential race?
Also ahead, we kick off a
three-part series
from Egypt -- tonight, silenced
by fear five
years after the revolution.
AMAL SHARAF, April 6 Movement:
They know that
he's a symbol for the
revolution. And he's
paying the price now. For what?
For saying
the truth, for opposing the
oppression.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Plus, a play
that tackles
the economic downfall of union
workers in
the once prosperous Reading,
Pennsylvania.
LYNN NOTTAGE, Pulitzer
Prize-Winning Playwright:
I decided that I want to go
about finding
sort of the source of this
trauma and figuring
out how we, as Americans, had
come to that
point where we could be living
so close to
poverty without recognizing it
on a daily
basis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: The first two
presidential
contests of the year are in the
books, and
on both sides, it still looks
wide open. Tuesday's
stunning results shook up the
field again,
and left a couple of names by
the wayside.
The rest moved on, hoping
clarity will come
soon.
A day after New Hampshire, the
Republican
field hit the ground running in
South Carolina,
battleground for their next
primary, February
20.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
Come out and help us. I need
your support.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
Oh, wow.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fresh off last
night's big
win, Donald Trump planned a
rally in the Palmetto
State tonight.
And on NBC's "Today Show," he
announced he
will release his tax returns
over the next
few months.
DONALD TRUMP: They're going to
be surprised
at how little I pay. I fight
like hell not
to pay a lot of tax. And you
know what? Every
politician probably does. I
watched others
where they say, oh, I want to
pay taxes. I
fight like hell not to pay
taxes. I hate the
way the government spends my
money.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Meanwhile,
John Kasich sought
to build on his surge to second
place in New
Hampshire. The Ohio governor has
mostly avoided
attacking his rivals, but said
he will answer
if they start attacking him.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
I'm not going to be a pincushion
or a marshmallow,
but I'm also not going to spend
my time trying
to trash other people. I will
tell you why,
because if this message works,
it's fantastic.
In New Hampshire, I had millions
and millions
of dollars spent against me. And
you know
what I told them last night? The
light overcame
the darkness of negative
campaigning, and
I feel great about it.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Texas Senator
Ted Cruz stumped
in Myrtle Beach today, after
officially being
awarded third place in New
Hampshire. He'd
won in Iowa just a week earlier.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Everyone said a conservative
couldn't compete
in a more moderate New England
state like
New Hampshire. Those predictions
proved wrong.
This is a national campaign. And
one of the
most important conclusions
coming out of these
first two states is that the
only candidate
who can beat Donald Trump is me.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jeb Bush
finished fourth
in New Hampshire, but now hopes
to score his
first win of the year, in South
Carolina.
The Bush campaign released a new
radio ad
today that features his brother
former President
George W. Bush.
GEORGE W. BUSH, Former President
of the United
States: We need a strong leader
with experience,
ideas, and resolve. There's no
doubt in my
mind that Jeb Bush will be a
great commander
in chief for our military.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The other
Floridian in the
race, Senator Marco Rubio,
stumbled to fifth
in New Hampshire. He said today
he still expects
to win the Republican
nomination.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO: Every nominee
of both parties
has a test, or more than one,
and it's a ride
that you have got to fight
through. I'm the
only one that can quickly unite
the Republican
Party and take our message to
new voters.
And that's been consistent in
the polling
and you have seen it all over
the country.
I feel strongly about that.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The New
Hampshire results
also winnowed the GOP field
today. New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie and
Carly Fiorina
dropped out of the race after
poor showings.
As for the Democrats, they're
looking ahead
to their next contest, the
Nevada caucuses,
10 days away. Fresh off his
landslide win
last night, Vermont Senator
Bernie Sanders
moved today to broaden his
appeal beyond his
mostly white base. He met with
Reverend Al
Sharpton in New York to discuss
issues affecting
the African-American community.
And, later, he took his message
to ABC's talk
show "The View."
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
We have a lot of support within
the African-American
community. But I think, most
importantly,
I think the reason we will do
well is our
views on criminal justice in
this country.
And that is, we have a broken
criminal justice
system. Why should we in America
have more
people in jail, largely
African-American and
Latinos, than another other
country on Earth?
(APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: For her part,
Hillary Clinton
was mostly out of public view,
after acknowledging
last night she needs to do
better appealing
to younger voters in particular.
The two Democrats are now
preparing to share
the stage tomorrow night, as PBS
hosts their
next presidential debate in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Gwen and Judy have already
arrived to prepare
for the debate. They join us now
from the
Helen Bader Concert Hall at the
University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
Gwen, Judy, I can you see there.
You all ready,
excited?
GWEN IFILL: We are excited,
Hari.
We are excited especially to be
doing this
on the weekend of the big,
iconic New Hampshire
primary. The results there were
so interesting.
And we're going to be talking to
two of the
candidates who made the most
news, Hillary
Clinton and Bernie Sanders, of
course.
And we have many, many questions
for them,
but, of course, if we told you
that, we would
then have to kill you.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: So we're just going
to keep them
to ourselves until tomorrow
night.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You know, Hari,
every one of
these debates has been different
-- I guess
that goes without saying -- but
because they
have taken place at a different
moment in
the campaign.
And, you know, you have to say,
this is a
pretty important turning point,
because Bernie
Sanders managed to come off with
a commanding
win from New Hampshire, as Gwen
just said.
So we expect this to be an
enlightening encounter.
GWEN IFILL: Do you have any
questions for
us to ask, Hari?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Sure. I think
there's a
Facebook group that have we been
working on.
They have sent you a lot. So,
hopefully, that
give you some ideas. People are
very interested
and they're following you
closely.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what we
have seen, Hari,
is that I noticed in the exit
polls yesterday
in New Hampshire, people were
asked how many
of them were affected by the
debates, and
a large percentage of voters say
they paid
attention to the debates. In one
way or another,
it affected their vote.
GWEN IFILL: You know, this is
going to be
the first commercial-free debate
we have had
this season. And public
broadcasting has a
special responsibility to bring
kind of a
deeper view to this.
And that's what we're hoping we
can do. We're
hoping that people come away
learning more
about what their choices are.
That's really
what these debates are all
about. That's what
they have been so successful at
so far this
year. And we just want to do our
part.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gwen Ifill and
Judy Woodruff,
on the eve of the PBS debate,
thanks for joining
us tonight.
GWEN IFILL: Thanks, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news,
the U.S. Justice Department
filed a civil
rights lawsuit against Ferguson,
Missouri.
That's after the city council
vetoed to revise
parts of a consent decree on
police and court
reform. The decree grew out of
the killing
of Michael Brown by a white
officer in 2014.
Local officials cited the cost
of compliance,
but U.S. Attorney General
Loretta Lynch rejected
that argument.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: The
agreement that was being
reviewed and was
discussed was painstakingly
negotiated by
both the department and the
city's own team.
That was the agreement that was
to be decided
upon. The city was well aware
that by deciding
not to accept it that they were
choosing litigation.
This is their choice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Ferguson Mayor
James Knowles
said earlier that the city was
prepared to
fight it out in court, if need
be.
Federal Reserve Chair Janet
Yellen sent new
signals today that the Central
Bank means
to go slow on additional
interest rate hikes.
At a House hearing, she said the
Fed's Open
Market Committee is keeping a
close eye on
global economic weakness and
turmoil in world
markets.
JANET YELLEN, Federal Reserve
Chair: The FOMC
anticipates that economic
conditions will
evolve in a manner that will
warrant only
gradual increases in the federal
funds rate.
In addition, the committee
expects that the
federal funds rate is likely to
remain for
some time below the levels that
are expected
to prevail in the longer run.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Central
Bank raised
interest rates in December for
the first time
in nearly a decade. Its next
decision on rates
comes next month.
In Nigeria, officials are
blaming the Islamist
Boko Haram group for deadly new
bombings.
Two women blew themselves up in
a refugee
camp today, killing at least 58
people and
wounding nearly 80. The
attackers struck northeast
of Maiduguri, the largest city
in the northeastern
portion of Nigeria, and the
militants' home
base.
NATO is moving to beef up its
presence in
the Baltics and Eastern Europe
to deter possible
Russian aggression. Alliance
defense ministers
met in Brussels today and agreed
to set up
new outposts in the region and
bolster troop
numbers. The measure also calls
for regular
war games and a rapid-reaction
force. Russia
has warned any such move will
threaten European
stability.
U.S. policy in Syria came under
fire on multiple
fronts today. Syrian rebels and
the governments
of France and Turkey all
complained of weakness
in Washington's actions.
Jonathan Rugman of Independent
Television
News is on the ground in Turkey.
JONATHAN RUGMAN: Russian
airstrikes like these
in the town of Tell Rifaat
yesterday have
sent rebels fighting President
Assad to new
levels of despair.
The Iranians are certainly
supporting the
Assad regime, sending Shia
militiamen and
Hezbollah fighters. And the
Russians are not
talking about a cease-fire until
March the
1st, clearly hoping these men
will take much
more territory before attempts
at peace talks
begin again.
Showing me a map of Aleppo under
siege is
Zakaria Malahifji, political
chief of one
of the largest Syrian rebel
groups armed and
funded by the CIA. But he says
the Americans
have deprived his men of
anti-aircraft missiles
to defend themselves.
ZAKARIA MALAHIFJI, Rebel
Political Chief (through
translator): The Americans are
doing nothing.
We tried to raise our voice, but
it was no
use. They know what's going on,
but, until
now, they're not using their
pressure for
a political solution. And how
are we going
to achieve this political
solution while the
Russians are destroying it?
JONATHAN RUGMAN: France's
foreign minister
has also had enough. Today,
Laurent Fabius
announced that he's stepping
down. President
Assad is gaining strength, he
said, complaining
of a lack of commitment from the
American
side.
The Turks feel the same way.
President Erdogan
has accused Washington of
causing a regional
bloodbath by supporting Kurdish
groups in
Syria, which he regards as
terrorists. With
injured Syrians now filling
Turkish hospitals,
the Turks may be tempted to
intervene themselves,
to defend both civilians and
rebels and push
back the Kurds.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Turkey also
rebuked the
United Nations today for
insisting that it
take in thousands of Syrian
refugees from
Aleppo. The Turkish prime
minister said that
would amount to aiding in ethnic
cleansing.
Back in this country, the U.S.
Senate moved
to impose new sanctions on North
Korea, after
its recent nuclear test and
satellite launch.
The legislation targets the
communist state's
ability to access money for
nuclear warheads
and long-range missiles. A
similar version
already passed the House.
And Wall Street struggled to a
mixed finish
after oil prices sank again. The
Dow Jones
industrial average lost nearly
100 points
to close at 15914. The Nasdaq
rose almost
15 points, but the S&P 500
slipped a fraction
of a point.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
how candidates
hope to sway the South's more
diverse electorate;
where leaders of the Arab spring
are five
years later; the CIA deputy
director on imminent
terror threats; and much more.
We look ahead now to Thursday's
Democratic
presidential debate, and the
next phase of
the campaign for both parties
coming out of
New Hampshire.
Joining us are Susan Page,
Washington bureau
chief for USA Today, and Reid
Wilson, chief
political correspondent for the
politics and
polling Web site Morning
Consult.
All right, let's start with the
Republicans
first. How meaningful was
Trump's win?
SUSAN PAGE, Washington Bureau
Chief, USA Today:
Pretty meaningful.
That was -- he not only won
among traditional
Republican voters in New
Hampshire. He won
among nontraditional Republican
voters, among
independents who voted in the
Republican primary,
among people who were voting in
a Republican
primary for the first time. So
he is clearly
drawing new people into the
Republican coalition.
And that raises a possibility
that he will
change what it means to be a
Republican.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about
Kasich coming
in second?
REID WILSON, Morning Consult:
Kasich essentially
saved off the end of his
campaign. The problem
for him going forward, though,
is that he's
likely to be living essentially
hand to mouth
for the rest of the campaign.
He spent most of his war chest
in New Hampshire
because it was either do or die
there. Now,
as he raises money in the wake
of a surprisingly
good showing, the first time I
think we can
ever say 16 percent is a
surprisingly good
showing, he will be essentially
spending every
dollar he possibly can on
television ads to
introduce himself to voters in
South Carolina,
and then if he makes it out of
there alive,
to voters in Nevada and then on
to the Super
Tuesday states.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rubio even
admitted yesterday
kind of his -- or day before --
in his concession
speech, saying, this is my
fault, this is
my debate performance, it won't
happen again.
Was it that singular event that
just...
SUSAN PAGE: I think we know from
the exit
polls of voters that the debate
loomed very
large in the last-minute
decisions made by
a lot of Republican voters.
Clearly, it really
hurt Rubio. We thought he was on
a path to
be second or, at worst, third.
That didn't happen. So, I think
that the next
debate, he's going to have a lot
to prove.
It's not that he's damaged
beyond the possibility
of recovery, but he's definitely
damaged.
He needs to prove that he can be
more self-assured,
be more self-confident and
especially be more
spontaneous in the next debate.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
speaking of self-assured,
confident, spontaneous, Jeb
Bush.
REID WILSON: Jeb Bush is -- this
result in
New Hampshire was just about the
worst thing
that could have happened for
sort of the business
lane Republicans who are all
trying to find
one candidate to coalesce
around.
It looked like Rubio coming out
of Iowa. Rubio
finishes fifth in New Hampshire,
Jeb Bush
only barely ahead of him. And
now they have
got a new contender for the
crown in John
Kasich, who will at least stick
around and
try to win those voters going
forward. So,
this means a divided business
lane of the
Republican Party.
Ted Cruz has his avenue,
especially among
evangelical voters, who play a
huge role in
South Carolina. And Donald Trump
has his fans,
as Susan says, largely new folks
coming into
the process. It's hard to see
how the business
end coalesces before we get to
the really
big Super Tuesday states on
March 1.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
the business
end, how much does the war chest
matter at
this point? If you're Jeb Bush,
you have got
a fair amount of support.
Perhaps if you're
Ted Cruz, you have picked up
some.
SUSAN PAGE: So, tell me how much
good has
that done Jeb Bush so far. Not
much. He spent
more than anybody else on ads,
on organization.
Now, of course, we do enter a
phase of the
campaign where it matters a
little more in
these big states. You do less
retail campaigning.
TV ads can mean more. But so far
this has
not rescued Jeb Bush. This has
been a campaign
of momentum, enthusiasm, and
anger, not one
where money talks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. And Ted
Cruz seemed
to spend the least amount of
money and had
a pretty respectable showing in
New Hampshire,
not where his demographic, his
base is.
REID WILSON: He spent about $18
per vote,
which is a bargain in this day
and age, when
Jeb Bush was spending somewhere
around $1,200
per vote, including the super
PAC.
Cruz's opportunities lie ahead,
no only in
South Carolina, where, as I say,
evangelical
voters play a huge role, but
also in those
March 1 Super Tuesday primaries.
A lot of
Southern state are voting that
day, Alabama,
Mississippi, Georgia, Virginia,
Texas, Cruz's
home state, Oklahoma, all places
where conservatives
play a huge role and especially
evangelical
conservatives.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. Today, we
heard basically
Fiorina and Christie deciding to
leave. Surprised?
SUSAN PAGE: No, not a surprise.
And, in fact, if they hadn't
left, they were
already irrelevant I think to
the conversation
going forward. That is the
situation that
Ben Carson now finds himself in.
He may or
may not drop out of this race.
It doesn't
really matter. He's been
discounted. We're
down to about five candidates
who matter.
And we will see what happens
going forward
as we head into these bigger
states at a faster
pace.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That's still a
crowded field.
It's not a two-person or
three-person field.
REID WILSON: It is.
And as we're talking about the
early states,
Susan brings up a very important
point here
about the pacing of all this.
The early states
are less about collecting the
delegates you
need to win the nomination once
you get to
Cleveland for the Republicans or
Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, for the Democrats.
The early states are about
building momentum
into those later voting states
where voters
are just now starting to tune
in, just starting
to pay attention. And those
voters who haven't
been paying attention before
have seen now
Bernie Sanders win big in New
Hampshire and
Donald Trump win big and Ted
Cruz's surprise
in Iowa. Those are the names
that are getting
the most attention nationally.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about the Democrats.
Bernie Sanders' win, does it
translate into
a win in Nevada or South
Carolina?
SUSAN PAGE: We will find out. It
was a big
win. This was stunning for a
candidate who
has not actually been a Democrat
before to
win the Democratic primary in
New Hampshire
over the person we thought was
once the likely
the front-runner, the likely
nominee by such
a huge margin. That's really
historic.
He also has money. It's not that
he starts
out with a big base of support
in a state
like South Carolina, but he's
raising a ton
of dough. And that means that he
may not have
the fate that some New Hampshire
winners have
had, which is where they can't
exploit and
capitalize on that victory.
He's in a position where his
finances mean
that this race on the Democratic
side, I think,
is guaranteed to go into the
spring.
HARI SREENIVASAN: One of the
weaknesses point
to is, how does he translate his
support in
New Hampshire and Iowa into a
far more racially
diverse population in the rest
of the country?
REID WILSON: It's going to be a
huge challenge
for him, and it's an opportunity
for Hillary
Clinton, who has a far deeper
bench base and
history with African-American
voters who dominate
in South Carolina, with Hispanic
voters who
dominate in Nevada.
Sanders, however, is getting the
opportunity
to introduce himself. In just
the -- what
was it, about 20 hours after the
polls closed
in New Hampshire, his campaign
said they had
raised something like $5
million, which is
-- that's a good month for some
candidates.
Sanders is going to have the
resources necessary
to keep his message on the air
in South Carolina,
which hasn't seen a lot of
advertising spending
yet, in Nevada and beyond.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, finally,
what's the
Clinton camp thinking today?
SUSAN PAGE: Well, I think they
are distressed.
I think they are distressed by
her showing.
They had hoped maybe they would
keep it to
single digits. That didn't
happen in New Hampshire.
Also, you look at what voters
told us in the
exit polls. They don't find her
honest. They
don't find her trustworthy. She
has a huge
deficit when it comes to younger
voters, voters
under 30.
These are issues that she's
going to have
to address in the next couple of
weeks if
she's going to prevail.
REID WILSON: The exit polls were
a disaster
for the Clinton campaign.
Among voters who said they
wanted an honest
and trustworthy candidate,
Sanders won more
than 90 percent of the vote.
Even among voters
who said that Clinton said
shared their views,
40 percent of those voters voted
for Bernie
Sanders.
It's really hard to see, at this
moment, any
sort of silver lining for the
Clinton campaign
coming out of New Hampshire, a
state that
effectively launched Bill
Clinton into the
White House.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Reid Wilson from
Morning Consult, Susan Page from
USA Today,
thanks so much.
SUSAN PAGE: Thank you.
REID WILSON: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Five years ago
today, Egypt
stood at the edge of tectonic
changes. The
protests that began January 25,
2011, in Cairo's
Tahrir Square would soon cause
the military-led
ouster of longtime President
Hosni Mubarak.
It was the culmination of the
so-called 18
days, and a high point of what
became known
as the Arab Spring. In 2012,
Egyptians elected
Mohammed Morsi of the Muslim
Brotherhood president.
The next year, he was deposed by
the military
and its top general, Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi.
Sisi was then elected president
in 2014.
It has been five years of
upheaval and tumult.
And, today, the picture from
Cairo is much
changed from those days of
protest.
Special correspondent Nick
Schifrin begins
tonight our series of three
reports, 5 Years
On.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Take me back five
years ago.
WOMAN: We kept crying from
happiness. I couldn't
believe it, we were saying. We
did it. We
made it. It was a dream that
came true.
MAN: All Egyptians are happy.
MAN (through translator): I
cried. I cried.
I was ecstatic. We laughed,
jumped, hugged
my colleagues, shouted. We did
everything.
NICK SCHIFRIN: How exciting was
that time?
MAN (through translator): After
the revolution,
we felt the highest stage of
freedom and expression
in our lives.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Five years later,
the revolution's
protagonists still revel in 18
days they call
utopia. But, today, the square
that toppled
a dictator is empty. There are
no celebrations
and no protesters, because
protests are illegal.
AMAL SHARAF, April 6 Movement:
During Mubarak,
at least we had the chance to
speak. Now we
are ruled by weapons. We can't
open our mouths.
If you go into the street, you
can get shot.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Today, Egypt is
tense. Above
Cairo's streets, President Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi
and his government keep a close
watch. They
have forcibly muted almost all
opposition.
When a state TV anchor
criticized him, she
was suspended. When a comedian
spoofed police
by blowing up condoms like
balloons, a politician
called for him to be assaulted,
forcing him
to go into hiding.
Adding to the fear, an Italian
student was
found dead just last week, his
body tortured.
In total, 40,000 political
prisoners fill
Egypt's jails. Hundreds, perhaps
thousands
more have disappeared into
secret prisons.
The government crackdown peaked
last month
in downtown Cairo. This has long
been the
epicenter for people who oppose
the government.
And this used to be full of
cafes. You can
see they have all been closed
now, clearly
designed to send the message
that nobody was
allowed the space to meet or
organize.
In today's Egypt, is there
freedom of speech?
MUSTAFA MAHER, Egypt (through
translator):
It's completely disappeared.
Either you're
a Sisi supporter and you can
freely talk,
or you oppose him even in a
limited way, like
a Facebook profile picture or on
Twitter,
and you will be brought to
justice.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Mustafa Maher is
the brother
of Ahmed Maher, one of Egypt's
best-known
activists. Ahmed Maher helped
lead the revolution.
On the streets, he became an
icon, mobbed
wherever he went.
AMAL SHARAF: "Dear Ahmed Maher,
we call for
your immediate and unconditional
release."
NICK SCHIFRIN: But, today,
Maher's admirers
can only write him letters. Two
years ago,
he and many of the revolution's
leaders were
arrested for protesting a new
law that banned
protesting. He has spent every
day since in
solitary confinement.
Amal Sharaf worked hand-in-hand
with Maher.
Will Ahmed see any of these?
Reham Ibrahim is Maher's wife.
REHAM IBRAHIM, Wife of Ahmed
Maher (through
translator): They don't allow
anything written,
not even personal messages.
Anything that
will provide any hope, they
block.
AMAL SHARAF: They know he's a
symbol for the
revolution. And he's paying the
price now.
For what? For saying the truth,
for opposing
the oppression.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Maher's daughter,
Meral (ph),
is 8. Each time she visits her
dad in prison,
she draws him a portrait. Last
month, the
portrait was of her crying.
REHAM IBRAHIM (through
translator): I never
imagined years would pass this
way, and I
don't know when they will end.
So what's her name?
Tariq El Khouly (ph) was also a
member of
the April 6 Movement. He painted
the group's
flag and demonstrated in Tahrir
Square. He
protested with Maher, but Khouly
gets to celebrate
his daughter's birthday in
person, because
he chose a different path.
So, we're in your office. And
this is a photo
of you and the president. What
is the significance
for you of this photo?
TARIQ EL KHOULY, Egyptian
Parliament Member
(through translator): Egypt
needs a president
that can unite Egyptians in a
dangerous time,
when the society is vulnerable
and could become
another Syria.
NICK SCHIFRIN: El Khouly might
still call
himself a revolutionary, but
he's not protesting
anymore. He's a member of
parliament.
TARIQ EL KHOULY (through
translator): We left
the political zone empty. We
should now be
filling this space.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The opposition
complains that
space has been co-opted, because
even President
Sisi praises the revolution. El
Khouly defends
the president by arguing
lawmaking is the
revolution's next step.
TARIQ EL KHOULY (through
translator): It's
time to protect the revolution
through politics
and to build strong parties in
parliament
and government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But what kind of
government?
And what are those parties'
priorities?
ABDEL RAHIM ALI, Egyptian
Parliament Member
(through translator): When the
matter has
to do with national security and
Egypt's place
in the world, we will act as one
man, called
Abdel Fattah El-Sisi.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Abdel Rahim Ali
is a member
of Parliament in the same
coalition as Tariq
El Khouly. They are supposed to
check presidential
power. But he and hundreds of
colleagues hastily
approved Sisi's campaign.
Rahim Ali broadcasts that
support. He is a
popular TV anchor who indicts
the government's
opponents on national
television. That's a
recording of Ahmed Maher's
private phone conversation.
Ali airs tapped phone calls, in
order to paint
revolutionaries like Maher as
disloyal Western
spies.
ABDEL RAHIM ALI (through
translator): The
devil Ahmed Maher is plotting to
get loads
of money from abroad and destroy
Egypt.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Your critics
accuse you of
McCarthyism.
ABDEL RAHIM ALI (through
translator): McCarthyism
is something else. We referred
to a group
of parties that want to kidnap
the whole country
on behalf of foreigners.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Ali supports the
kind of nationwide
surveillance he performs in his
own office.
His main target? The most
organized opposition,
the Muslim Brotherhood.
Three-and-a-half years ago, the
Brotherhood's
Mohammed Morsi became Egypt's
first democratically
elected president. When the
military overthrew
him, and when Sisi took power,
the Brotherhood
was labeled a terrorist group.
They're the government's primary
culprit,
even for natural disasters. When
heavy flooding
killed seven people in
Alexandria, the government
released this video of alleged
Muslim Brotherhood
members and accused them of
clogging the sewers.
ABDEL RAHIM ALI (through
translator): The
conspiracy is still there. They
are trying
to achieve tomorrow what wasn't
achieved yesterday
using the counter-revolution
powers from the
Muslim Brotherhood.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But right now,
thousands of
Muslim Brotherhood members are
in prison.
And the leaders who aren't
jailed are in exile.
AMR DARRAG, Muslim Brotherhood:
The media
and the black campaigning has
managed to cultivate
some sort of fear inside many
Egyptians.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Amr Darrag is the
most senior
Muslim Brotherhood leader not in
prison. He
Skyped with us from Istanbul.
AMR DARRAG: Sisi right now, what
he's doing,
he's trying to close all room
for work, not
just for the Brotherhood, but
all of the political
and social players in Egypt.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And that means
Muslim Brotherhood
supporters still in Egypt need
to hide; 22-year-old
Mahmoud, not his real name,
comes from a Brotherhood
family. In 2013, he joined
protests against
the military takeover,
demonstrations that
ended with a massacre of
Brotherhood supporters.
Today, he stays quiet. He would
only speak
to us if we hid his face.
MAHMOUD, Egypt (through
translator): You can
never feel comfortable about
your security.
The leaders are either
imprisoned or killed.
Many supporters have been
disappeared. There
is no Muslim brother still free.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And the secular
activists aren't
free either. They stay inside,
knowing they
lack public support.
AMAL SHARAF: No public protests,
not because
we are afraid, because we have
been through
a lot of demonstrators, and a
lot of people
got killed because it will do
nothing. People
are not with us.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Perhaps the only
activists
keeping the faith are the very
ones the Egyptian
government has silenced.
In 2013, "PBS NewsHour"
interviewed Ahmed
Maher.
AHMED MAHER, Activist (through
translator):
I am convinced that January 25
was the beginning
of the revolution, not the whole
revolution.
NICK SCHIFRIN: We played the
clip for Maher's
family.
AHMED MAHER (through
translator): That's why
the results of the revolution
are not known
yet.
REHAM IBRAHIM (through
translator): My reaction
to the video was not to what he
said, but
to Ahmed himself. For most
people, he is just
a figure, but, for me, he is my
life.
MUSTAFA MAHER: That instead of
longing to
move -- is already our home,
where I as a
citizen have dignity and freedom
in my country.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But, today, Maher
has no freedom.
And his dream of the revolution
is a dream
deferred.
Nick Schifrin, "PBS NewsHour,"
Cairo.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tomorrow
night, Nick Schifrin
will look at the central role of
Egypt's courts
in the revolution.
Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
Supreme Court
halts President Obama's landmark
climate change
plan, and "Sweat," a play that
doesn't shy
away from hard work.
But, first, yesterday America's
top intelligence
officials were on Capitol Hill
yesterday to
discuss their updated assessment
of worldwide
threats to the United States.
Among their
top concerns, cyber-attacks, the
Islamic State
group, the war in Syria, North
Korea's nuclear
activities and a resurgent
Russia.
We're joined now by David Cohen,
the deputy
director of the Central
Intelligence Agency.
He's been at the CIA for one
year, after five
years at the Treasury Department
overseeing
sanctions implementation and
efforts to combat
terrorism financing.
So, when I rattle off those
lists of concerns
that the community has, what are
the top three
that keep you up at night?
DAVID COHEN, Deputy Director,
Central Intelligence
Agency: Well, I think that was a
list of six,
and I think all six of those
keep us up at
night.
I mean, obviously, we're
spending a lot of
time focused on the threat from
ISIL. We're
also very much engaged in what's
happening
in Syria and Iraq, the threat
from Russia.
And just this past weekend, we
saw North Korea
launch a rocket after a nuclear
test they
conducted about six weeks ago,
so all these
issues are, you know, top of the
list for
us at the agency.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. Given the
time you spent
a lot of time at Treasury
looking at sanctions,
right now, especially in the
political climate,
there is quite a conversation
happening about
Iran after the nuclear deal.
DAVID COHEN: Sure.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So looking at
it now through
your lens at the CIA, what
intelligence do
we have? How are we so confident
we can catch
Iran if they were to cheat?
DAVID COHEN: Well, the Joint
Comprehensive
Plan of Action, the JCPOA, that
was agreed
to over the summer has within it
a whole series
of measures that would allow the
IAEA the
unprecedented access to Iran's
nuclear program,
from the very -- from the
uranium mills and
mines all the way through
whatever enrichment
facilities they may have, to
their centrifuges,
an extraordinary window into
what Iran is
doing that the IAEA will have
and the international
community will have.
And that's one very important
part of it,
but we have also been very much
focused on
Iran's nuclear program for a
number of years,
and so we will be able to,
obviously, supplement
what the IAEA is able to
discover through
our own efforts as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What about the
money that's
sort of been freed up past the
deal? We have
heard even Secretary of State
Kerry after
the deal say, listen, I can't
account for
every dollar, where it goes.
At the CIA, are you seeing
evidence that any
of those dollars that had been
freed are going
to fund terrorism organizations?
DAVID COHEN: Look, one of the
major reasons
that Iran entered into the
nuclear deal was
because of the sanctions and
because of the
huge economical toll that had
been created
over the years by the sanctions
program.
So I think it's our assessment
that Iran is
intending to use the sanctions
relief, the
vast majority of the sanctions
relief that
it will be obtaining to repair
its economy,
to try and deliver some modicum
of economic
growth to its people. And we
will be watching
very carefully how Iran is
making use of that
money. We're watching it very
carefully.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK.
Let's talk a little bit about
ISIS, or ISIL.
We had a report that we saw just
today from
fighters trained by the CIA
saying that they
feel abandoned on the
battlefield, especially
in light of recent events. How
do you support
them?
DAVID COHEN: Well, look, I'm not
going to
get into anything that the CIA
may or may
not be doing with respect to the
battlefield
in Syria.
I will say that the Russians, in
particular,
since they have come in to Syria
last fall,
you know, came in saying that
they were there
to fight Da'esh, to fight the
terrorists,
have spent most of their time
trying to bolster
Assad.
And what that has meant is
helping the Syrian
regime to bomb the moderate
opposition in
Syria, which has been putting
pressure on
the Assad regime. That is not
fighting Da'esh,
and it's taking a toll on the
moderate opposition.
But, you know, the State
Department has a
program to work with the
moderate opposition.
Others around the world,
frankly, in the Middle
East and beyond are working to
try and support
the moderate opposition. They
have been taking
it on the chin recently, but
they have also
been quite resilient. You know,
this conflict
has been going on now for, you
know, five
years, close to five years.
And the moderate opposition has,
you know,
faced first the Syrian regime.
They faced
Hezbollah working with the
Syrian regime.
They faced the Iranians working
with the Syrian
regime and now they're facing
the Russians
working with the Syrian regime,
and they are
a resilient bunch.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All these
things lead me
to say that we are living
through a period
of incredible geopolitical
instability right
now. And part of the reason that
we're aware
of that is because of the spread
of digital
technology.
One of the concerns that's
always come from
the intelligence community is
that you're
not getting enough help from the
technology
companies. So, I wanted to ask,
if you find
a suspect somewhere overseas
that has some
sort of a social media presence,
are the Facebooks,
the Googles, the Twitters of the
world helping
you in any way?
DAVID COHEN: Look, I'm not going
to get into
the sort of particularities of
how we -- how,
if we find a suspect who is on
social media,
how we're able to tap into that.
There is an ongoing conversation
with the
media companies, some of which
we're involved
in, but also, you know, the FBI
and others
in domestic law enforcement are
very much
engaged in this conversation.
We set up this new directorate
specifically
because we have recognized that
we need to
do a better job of leveraging
and operating
in the digital domain. I mean, I
think your
viewers know this as well as we
do that increasingly
we live our lives online.
Increasingly, the
information that we have access
to is digital
information.
And we, as the Central
Intelligence Agency,
felt that we needed to do a
better job of
both harnessing the digital
information that
we have, of thinking about how
we operate
in the digital domain, and
making sure that
we are making use of digital
technologies
to the greatest extent possible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, I
have heard that
one of the things that you say
to the new
folks that are being sworn in is
that this
is an agency that's governed by
law, right?
DAVID COHEN: Right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And one of the
practices
that's very difficult for
Americans to swallow
is drone strikes that kill
targets overseas,
and at times, there are civilian
casualties
as well. A lot of people are
going to say,
you know what? That seems like
extrajudicial
killings. That doesn't seem that
would be
following what American law is.
Should the CIA be in the drone
strike business?
DAVID COHEN: Look, I'm not going
to comment
on whether the CIA is involved
in any of those
sorts of activities.
I will say, however, that the
embrace of legal
constraints on what we do,
domestic law, international
law, is something that we are
quite happy
to have and to operate within a
system of
laws. And what makes the CIA,
what makes the
United States different from
many countries
around the world is adherence to
the rule
of law.
And, as you said, Hari, when I
swear in new
officers, one of the points I
make to them
is that we operate within a
legal construct,
we operate within the laws, not
fighting against
it, but willingly, happily
embracing the fact
that what we do is governed by
law. That's
core to the CIA. It's core to
what this country
is all about, and it's not
something that
we chafe against at all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
David Cohen with
the CIA, thanks so much for
joining us.
DAVID COHEN: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In a surprise
move late
yesterday, the U.S. Supreme
Court stepped
in to put the centerpiece of
President Obama's
climate change agenda on hold,
pending the
outcome of judicial appeals in
the lower courts.
William Brangham has that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In a move
that's been called
unprecedented, the Supreme Court
has temporarily
blocked major environmental
regulations that
were designed to cut back on
greenhouse gas
emissions from coal-fired power
plants.
The high court's order means
these regulations,
which were put out by the
Environmental Protection
Agency, can't go into effect
until legal challenges
against them are settled. The
coal industry
and a consortium of states have
sued to stop
the rules, calling them -- quote
-- "a power
grab."
To help us understand all this,
we turn to
Coral Davenport, who has been
reporting the
story for The New York Times.
So, Coral, before we get to what
the court
ordered, let's talk a little bit
about these
regulations. These are not some
arcane set
of rules. These seem pretty
fundamental to
the president's environmental
agenda.
CORAL DAVENPORT, The New York
Times: Yes,
the regulation that was put on
hold is really
at the heart of President
Obama's climate
change agenda.
In his second term, President
Obama really
wanted to build a legacy around
addressing
climate change. He just got back
less than
two months ago from a meeting in
Paris where
the first ever universal global
accord on
climate change was signed.
One of the reasons or one of the
cornerstones
for the success of that accord
was the fact
that the U.S. had acted on this
specific policy.
So this is -- as you say, this
is not some
small, arcane policy. This was
set to be sort
of the cornerstone of what
President Obama
hoped would be the first major
climate action
by the United States.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The coal
industry and 20-something
states have been suing to try to
block these
rules. What has been their
argument against
them?
CORAL DAVENPORT: Their reason to
block the
rules is, if the rules were to
go into effect,
they would target, as you say,
emissions from
coal-fired power plants, and in
the long run
probably shut down hundreds of
coal-fired
power plants in the U.S.
They would freeze construction
of future coal-fired
power plants and almost
certainly freeze the
domestic market for U.S. coal.
So the coal
industry and states where coal
mining or coal-fired
power plants are a big part of
the company
have been fighting tooth and
nail against
this rule from the very
beginning.
Their legal argument is that
rule is so broad,
so creative that it's a sort of
overinterpretation
of the existing law of the Clean
Air Act,
that it violates the
Constitution. These are
their legal arguments against
the rule.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, the
Supreme Court steps
in and says no implementing of
these rules
until the legal challenges
against the rules
are settled. Is that what's
unusual about
this, the timing of when the
court stepped
in?
CORAL DAVENPORT: Yes, it's very
rare for the
court to issue a stay like this,
and almost
unprecedented for the court to
halt a regulation
before the regulation has --
before there's
even been any kind of court or
legal action.
So the regulation is on track to
-- there
will be oral arguments in a
district federal
court in June, but, essentially,
you know,
the Supreme Court is halting
implementation
of the rule before it's even had
its first
day in court. That is what is so
surprising
about this.
And I can tell you that even the
plaintiffs
in this case, even the coal
states and coal-fired
power plants who sued for this
actually called
this result amazing. Even they
were surprised
that the Supreme Court did this.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You touched on
this a little
bit earlier. In fact, you
reported today that
the Supreme Court's move could
prove to be
a major blow to the Paris
agreements that
this administration and hundreds
of other
countries agreed to. Explain how
that would
work. How does a domestic ruling
affect an
international global treaty?
CORAL DAVENPORT: Well, the
accord -- it's
not quite a treaty -- the
accord, what's important
about it is, it's the first ever
universal
climate change deal. Every
country on Earth
has signed on to this deal with
a commitment
to take action at home on
climate change.
And, historically, the reason no
such deal
has been possible before is
because of lack
of action by the United States.
So, once President
Obama put this regulation in
place, he met
with his counterparts, he met
with the other
world leaders in China, in
India, around the
world, and said, look, we have
got this policy
in place, this regulation is
being implemented,
the U.S., the largest historic
carbon emitter
in the world is acting.
And because of the nature of
climate change,
you know, it's a global problem.
You can't
have a solution unless really
all the players
are on board. And so President
Obama used
this regulation as leverage in,
you know,
getting a deal and getting other
countries
on board.
If this rule is not enacted, if
it is ultimately
struck down by the Supreme
Court, it takes
away that leverage. It takes
away this major
action by the world's largest
economy. And
so already in New Delhi and
Beijing, there
are questions about, well, if
the U.S. might
not be able to meet its
commitment, you know,
there are questions about, well,
why should
other countries do the same?
No one is threatening not to
move forward
with the accord yet, but what
analysts in
those other countries are saying
is, they're
going to look ahead to the final
Supreme Court
decision. If the Supreme Court
moves all the
way ahead and strikes down this
rule, it really
could imperil this Paris
agreement that was
celebrated with such fanfare
less than two
months ago.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All right,
Coral Davenport
of The New York Times, thanks so
much.
CORAL DAVENPORT: It's great to
be with you.
Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally: A
new play tells the story of an
industrial
Pennsylvania city in decline and
the impact
on a group of friends.
Jeffrey Brown talks with
Pulitzer Prize-winning
playwright Lynn Nottage.
JEFFREY BROWN: The year is 2000,
the setting,
a bar in Reading, Pennsylvania,
as friends,
co-workers at a steel plant,
celebrate a birthday.
But as time passes, there is
little celebrating,
rather, a sense of loss, of
jobs, friendships,
loved ones, a way of life.
ACTRESS: The union don't got a
lot to say
about it. Those machines are
gone. They aren't
coming back. But if we do this
right, we can
protect the rest of your jobs.
LYNN NOTTAGE, Pulitzer
Prize-Winning Playwright:
I decided that I wanted to go
about finding
sort of the source of this
trauma and figuring
out how we as Americans had come
to that point
where we could be living so
close to poverty
without recognizing it on a
daily basis.
ACTOR: You need to shut up and
drink your
beer. That's exactly why I
didn't say anything,
man.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is humor in
Lynn Nottage's
new play "Sweat," but at its
heart, it's a
harrowing look at workers who
have been impacted
by large forces in American
life.
ACTOR: Three generations of
loyalty to the
same company. I never imagined
working anywhere
else. I get injured, I'm in the
hospital for
nearly two months, can't walk,
can't feel
my toes.
JEFFREY BROWN: The characters
live amid the
decline of the Rust Belt, the
consequences
of NAFTA and new technology, the
weakening
of unions.
LYNN NOTTAGE: The bar is the
place where the
truth happens most often,
because you have
the lubricant that loosens
people's tongues.
JEFFREY BROWN: The bar in the
play itself
is based on a real one in
Reading, a city
once a symbol of industrial
power, home to
the Reading Railroad Company, so
famous from
"Monopoly," and in its day, one
of the richest
corporations in the world.
By 2011, though, Reading was
cited as the
poorest city in the nation, with
more than
41 percent of its citizens
living below the
poverty line. The statistics
drew Nottage,
and her research began.
LYNN NOTTAGE: I got in a car
with someone
who I was working with, and we
drove the 2.5
hours to Reading from New York
City and just
began to explore it.
I always begin by saying that
I'm not a reporter
and I'm not there to fix
anything. I'm just
there to listen and to absorb.
And it may
result in something and it may
result in nothing
at all. But I find that, for a
lot of people,
there's this palliative effect
of just sitting
down and talking, and having
someone who's
nodding and listening and
appreciative of
their stories.
JEFFREY BROWN: And did some of
these interviews,
or whatever you want to call
them, gathering
of stories, end up in the play?
LYNN NOTTAGE: Absolutely. After
about a year-and-a-half,
I encountered a group of
steelworkers who
had been locked out of their
factory for 92
weeks. This was a group of sort
of burly,
sturdy people who normally,
given where I
live and given what I do, I
wouldn't have
the opportunity to sit down
with.
But we're sitting in a circle,
and they began
to tell their stories. And the
majority of
them had been working in the
steel factory
for between 25 to 30 years.
JEFFREY BROWN: Many stories
later, the result
is "Sweat," a co- commission of
the Oregon
Shakespeare Festival and Arena
Stage in Washington,
D.C., where the play is now
running.
Here, Tracey, a central
character, looks back
to what she sees as the good old
days.
ACTRESS: My family's been here
since the '20s.
They built the house that I live
in. They
built this town. My grandfather
was German.
He could build anything,
cabinets, fine furniture,
anything.
JEFFREY BROWN: Nostalgia comes
as security
is slipping away, and machines
and jobs literally
disappear overnight.
Tracey's friend, Cynthia,
fulfills her dream
of a management position after
26 years on
the factory floor, only to find
herself cut
off by co-workers as layoffs
begin.
ACTOR: Are they trying to
squeeze us out?
KIMBERLY SCOTT, Actress: You saw
how easy
it was for them to sneak in and
break down
those machines while all of us
were at home
sleeping. I guarantee you
they're in Mexico.
JEFFREY BROWN: For Kimberly
Scott, who plays
Cynthia, the themes hit home.
KIMBERLY SCOTT: I was raised in
a union household.
JEFFREY BROWN: You were?
KIMBERLY SCOTT: Yes. One of the
first things
I learned to read was the United
Transportation
Union newsletter. My dad worked
on the railroad
for over 30 years. When I went
to graduate
school, I remember a day when I
was going
to school and I had to cross the
union picket
line to get into class.
And it was traumatic. I remember
calling my
mom, crying, what do I do, what
do I do? And
she said, baby, you're there to
get an education.
You do what you have to do.
JEFFREY BROWN: As changes come,
no one is
spared, not Chris, Cynthia's
son, or his best
friend, Jason, who also work at
the plant,
not Stan the bartender, or his
young helper
Oscar from a Latino family, who
decides to
cross a picket line to improve
his lot, with
tragic consequences.
ACTOR: You offer me $3 more per
hour than
I make here.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lynn Nottage
says, after all
the research, she started her
writing at the
end of the story, with these
four men.
LYNN NOTTAGE: The image that I
had was the
last image of the play, in which
you have
four men for who come from very
different
backgrounds standing on the
stage in a moment
of extreme crisis and trying to
find the vocabulary
to communicate across the
divide. That's what
I began with, and I thought, how
do I get
there?
JEFFREY BROWN: Nottage is best
known for her
2009 Pulitzer Prize-winning play
"Ruined,"
which examined another crisis,
violence against
women in an African civil war.
Where does the compulsion come
from for you
to look at things like this?
LYNN NOTTAGE: It comes from
curiosity. It's
one of the things that I always
told my students,
is replace judgment with
curiosity.
JEFFREY BROWN: I mean, because
people usually
come in with judgments?
LYNN NOTTAGE: People enter with
judgment.
And I think that judgment
becomes a wall.
And rather than being passive
and sitting
back and allowing that curiosity
to sort of
die, I reach out and ask the
question. And
so I think that's why I travel.
And that's
why I go in search of
characters.
JEFFREY BROWN: "Sweat," drama
that takes on
social and economic issues now
part of the
presidential campaign, is in
Washington through
February, and is then expected
to move to
New York.
From Arena Stage, I'm Jeffrey
Brown for the
"PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: On the
"NewsHour" online
right now: In 1995, "NewsHour"'s
Margaret
Warner profiled a brash young
congressman
from Ohio who was charged with
coming up with
the plan to balance the
country's budget.
Yesterday that same Republican
surprised everyone
in New Hampshire with a
second-place win.
Watch that original report on
John Kasich
on our home page.
And don't call them ghost towns.
These massive
Chinese cities are just too new
for anyone
to live there yet. See the empty
skyscrapers
and the birth of a new
metropolis in a photo
essay on Art Beat. All that and
more is on
our Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, tune in at 9:00
p.m. Eastern.
Gwen Ifill and Judy Woodruff
moderate the
"PBS NewsHour" Democratic
presidential debate,
in partnership with Facebook,
from the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.